We'll just grab the pen out. Fishers are happy to listen the next time.
Right.
They'll just sit in the background.
Okay.
All right, well, good morning and welcome.
Jenny, thank you for appearing in front of the committee this morning.
We have 15 minutes with you this morning, and the time is yours to
introduce us to your bill.
Kia ora, and thank you very much,
Mr. Chair and the select committee for having me here today.
So the Residential Tenancies
Amendment Bill
is proposed in particular to address the lack of
oversight that we have as a country about boarding
houses. Because what we know, and this has been a
long-standing issue right throughout the country, is
we actually don't know who the landlords are of boarding houses.
We don't know the location of boarding houses.
And this is an issue that is not just in Auckland, not just
in South Auckland in my electorate of Panmure or Tahu,
but we know that it's an issue in Dunedin, in
Invercargill, and in many other places in Aotearoa, New Zealand.
So the main thing that the bill actually
proposes is for the Ministry of Housing and Urban
Development to create and to maintain a
register of boarding houses and
this register also to have the names and details of
landlords. It is not proposed that the
tenant's information is in this register.
It's only the landlord's information that would be on
the register. It also proposes a number of things.
So it proposes that
you have to register if you're a landlord every 12 months, and
that if you're not on the register, you cannot
be a landlord that can be giving out
tenancies to boarding house tenants.
And it also establishes a duty of
care, a duty and a process, sorry, for this registration to happen,
and the registration to be renewed every 12 months.
It also proposes suspension and
cancellation of this registration.
It also creates offenses and penalties.
Now,
I've only read some of the submissions that have been put through
to this select committee, and quite a few of them actually
propose that the penalties are set
too low, and that it should be set
so that it's in accordance with what's currently there for
tenancies at the moment in terms of the
act. And of course, this is something that you as a select
committee would have a say in, and all members of Parliament
who would like to put through amendments will also have a say in.
One of the things that we know is that when
boarding houses aren't-- And we all know,
actually, the laws are there. There's the tenancy laws.
Also, councils have their own regulations.
But unfortunately, in order to have oversight of all boarding
houses, we first of all have to
know where these boarding houses are.
And so that's actually the main thing that this amendment
proposes. Can we, as a country, find out where
these boarding houses are? Because in order to
monitor and have better oversight of boarding houses, we should actually
know where they are located. Some of the
submissions that have been put through say that this
bill does not create safety in
terms of ensuring that all of these boarding houses are also
safe as a building. Now, I wanted just to say that this is
but one part
of-- And I'm actually not proposing that this bill
is the overall solution to boarding houses.
This is by far kind of the first step.
Let's find out where these boarding houses are.
Let's have better oversight of these boarding houses and let's
ensure that the current laws and regulations that are there now can
be better implemented.
I've given all of you a little summary
of the bill.
And can I just now open up for questions?
Oh, thank you very much. First question is from Paula.
Hi. I'm
really interested in what people are saying about penalties.
We've had some legislation in here before
where
we had that argument about whether the penalties are right
because of the issue over it really paying to
not comply. When you have
had a think about that, I'd love your honest opinion.
Do you think that the penalties are
sufficient, or would you rather see penalties go up in this
one?
So, this is only from one of the submissions, right?
So, the New Zealand Council of Christian Social Services.
Yes.
And they have many, many thousands of people that they
serve, and they do serve quite a lot of people that are tenants in boarding
houses. And what they suggest as one of their recommendations is that
the fines should be increased so that it is in line with the
Residential Tenancies Act now.
Mm.
And so that fine is actually at 50,000.
So it's much higher than the fine
proposed in the bill itself at the moment.
But I do see why they are proposing that it should be
aligned with the Residential Tenancies Act, because this bill is
proposing to amend the Residential Tenancies Act.
It makes sense, doesn't it? Thank you.
Maureen.
Thank you, Jenny. A couple of questions.
Is there a definition of boarding house?
Yes. This bill actually gives a definition of boarding houses.
Oh, okay.
But this is also one of the problems.
There are four different legislations that touches on
boarding houses in Aotearoa, New Zealand right now,
and they don't have the same definition of boarding houses.
Mm.
And so one of the things that we're wanting to do is to actually
ensure that the boarding house's definition is one and the same.
Okay. Does it in-
Just a supplementary on that. Where is the definition?
Yeah, where is it?
I couldn't find it.
Good question.
And so I guess the rationale for it is, you could have someone who has one
person boarding their house. Are they captured by that?
Yeah.
I'll come back to you on that one.
Okay.
If I can have the next question.
I have another one.
While I'm looking through.
What would be the role of, say, a property manager in something
like this? So the landlord-
Yeah
... which I presume is the owner of the building.
But if the
management's subcontracted out to a property manager, what would be their
role? And in some of these places,
and I've experienced with one particular one,
where actually it was so casual that there were no tenancy agreements.
The people had a very casual arrangement
for being in a particular place. So how would you
capture those places, too, that don't have a formal tenancy
agreement?
So under this act, you must be a landlord that
actually has a registration that the
Ministry of Housing and Urban Development gives you,
actually has you on the register as being a landlord.
Your initial question, though, is what is the role of the property manager?
Mm.
So this legislation actually holds the landlord to account.
So not all boarding houses would have
a property manager. Some boarding houses, it's just one house, right, with a few
tenants.
Yeah.
There are some boarding houses with
many
tenants. And so,
the registration certification would actually just have
the names of the landlords on it.
And in terms of how boarding houses are run, that would
be between the landlord and the property manager, if they have
one.
Right. So the property manager couldn't subcontract his
responsibility
for the building to a property manager.
I actually don't cover a property manager in this particular bill.
So this bill-
Yeah, so the landlord can't sub
or contract away his responsibility.
That is actually one of the issues that the Law
Association pointed out, that the bill should be more
firm and to provide more clarity on that.
We know that it's been covered in media lately that
there are some landlords that could do that.
And so that would be something I'll take away,
to see what possible amendments we could ensure that the bill
is much stronger on that, so that landlords can't just subcontract
their responsibilities away.
Thank you.
Jay.
Yeah. My question was very similar to Maureen's around the definition
and who it actually captures. And
obviously there's a lot of people that just have a tenant in their home.
But I'm thinking that's not going to capture that by the discussion that we're
having.
If it's a tenant that lives with someone in their own home,
that wouldn't be classified as a boarding house in this, right?
Because that's just
someone who lives in the house.
Yeah. So I guess the definition's going to be super important.
Yes.
So, but the other question is, once we have the
information, what do you
foresee in the future around compliance and that, apart from having to
register every year? How can that information...
Who would use that information?
Well, that information will be available to the public, to councils,
and to all of us as members of Parliament.
And really, it's to ensure that
the landlords and owners of boarding houses are
fit
of
good character, I suppose. And that the boarding houses that they have
are
fit for purpose, and that human beings should be able to live in
those houses,
that it is of a certain quality.
Unfortunately, many of us as local MPs have probably come across boarding
houses that
are just not fit for human beings to live in.
Donna.
Thank you.
Thank you, Jenny. And you've obviously done a lot of work on this, so appreciate
that. My question is in
two parts. Firstly,
just confirming that there is currently
no oversight of compliance of boarding houses with-
You know, healthy home standards or anything like that, that they have to actually
reach. Is that correct?
So councils,
each particular councils are supposed to have oversight of-
Right
... boarding houses. But unfortunately,
because councils don't know where all these boarding houses are,
no one knows
who is running a boarding house. There's no
council register. There's no national oversight register.
This is one of the main reasons why this bill is being proposed.
So if your question is, is there a national
oversight from,
say-
Well-
... central government?
Well, no, my question is, is there anyone checking whether they
comply with normal
standards, I guess, for people living in an
abode? But clearly there's not, is what I think.
It should happen. But this is the problem, we actually just don't know where these
boarding houses are located.
Okay. And so the second part of my question is,
have you done any early work on what the cost of
establishing this system would be?
Do you have any idea? Because obviously someone would have to set up the
system, the database, and then
monitor compliance, check, it would have to be a national
program of monitoring. Is there any idea of what
the system approach might actually cost?
As a member of Parliament, I haven't done those costings, but I am hopeful
that the session we have with MHAD very soon
that they would be able to advise us on
how much something like this would cost.
Okay, great. Thank you.
And then Keith.
Last question,
Jenny, that I had was just,
I see in the explanatory note that the purpose of the bill is
to maintain a register of boarding houses and boarding house landlords,
and that is because of a frustration and lack of data about boarding houses and
boarding house landlords, et cetera.
Given that, I'm wondering why the bill proposes reregistering
every 12 months.
For the purposes of creating a register, why does there need to be reregistration
every 12 months?
It is really to try and capture those who, within those
12 months, are in breach. Right? But there are some submissions
who have come through, including from the
Law Association, saying that maybe it should be over two years instead of every
12 months.
Okay.
That it would be too cumbersome to have the registration every 12
months.
Great. All right. No, thank you very much.
So it's one of those issues to be worked through.
For sure. Yeah. No, I appreciate that. All right.
Thank you very much for appearing before the committee this morning.
We'll see you shortly.
Thank you.